README.md, before:

# MailToJson

Receives email and forwards it to your app as a JSON webhook (aka simple half-assed [Mailgun](http://mailgun.com) clone).


## Install application

Assuming you have Erlang and Elixir installed.

* Install dependencies: `mix deps.get`
* Set the webhook url by setting system env var `M2J_WEBHOOK_URL`
* Follow the next section for local or remote setup
* Start server with Elixir console: `iex -S mix`


## Setup receiving mail

### Remote setup (vps and such)

* Let's assume that you want to receive mail on the domain `foo.example.com`
* Note the IP address of your server
* Add the following DNS records for `example.com`
  * Add an `A record` with the IP address of your server, that points to `foo.example.com`
  * Add an `MX record` with the value `foo.example.com`


### Local setup

* Forward port 25 to 2525 on your server

  * For linux
    ```shell
    # You'll have to run the above command everytime or add it permanently to your iptables.
    $ sudo iptables -t nat -A PREROUTING -p tcp -m tcp --dport 25 -j REDIRECT --to-ports 2525
    ```
  * For Mac (I think this works, but please send a PR if it's wrong)
    ```shell
    sudo ipfw add fwd 127.0.0.1,25 tcp from me to 127.0.0.1 dst-port 2525
    ```

## Playing with it

You can send a test mail from your local computer from the Elixir shell itself by running `MailToJson.test_mail`. You should receive a log message on the shell and also a POST request at the webhook url you configured.

## License

Copyright &copy; 2014, Akash Manohar J, under the MIT License

Commit message:

Add caveats section to readme

README.md, after:

# MailToJson

Receives email and forwards it to your app as a JSON webhook (aka stripped down [MailGun](http://mailgun.com) clone).


## Install application

Assuming you have Erlang and Elixir installed.

* Install dependencies: `mix deps.get`
* Set the webhook url by setting system env var `M2J_WEBHOOK_URL`
* Follow the next section for local or remote setup
* Start server with Elixir console: `iex -S mix`


## Setup receiving mail

### Remote setup (vps and such)

* Let's assume that you want to receive mail on the domain `foo.example.com`
* Note the IP address of your server
* Add the following DNS records for `example.com`
  * Add an `A record` with the IP address of your server, that points to `foo.example.com`
  * Add an `MX record` with the value `foo.example.com`


### Local setup

* Forward port 25 to 2525 on your server

  * For linux
    ```shell
    # You'll have to run the above command everytime or add it permanently to your iptables.
    $ sudo iptables -t nat -A PREROUTING -p tcp -m tcp --dport 25 -j REDIRECT --to-ports 2525
    ```
  * For Mac (I think this works, but please send a PR if it's wrong)
    ```shell
    sudo ipfw add fwd 127.0.0.1,25 tcp from me to 127.0.0.1 dst-port 2525
    ```

## Playing with it

You can send a test mail from your local computer from the Elixir shell itself by running `MailToJson.test_mail`. You should receive a log message on the shell and also a POST request at the webhook url you configured.

## Caveats

* No security
* No myriad of configuration
* Doesn't handle attachments

## License

Copyright &copy; 2014, Akash Manohar J, under the MIT License
